Networking.md, before:

# What is Networking?

networking is practice of connecting multiple devices or computers to share information and resources.
**Importance of Networkin:**

1. Global Connectivity
2. Efficiency & Productivity
3. Information Sharing
4. Economic Impact
5. Innovation

## Types of Networks

1. PAN (Personal Area Network)
   - PAN connects electronic devices within a user's immediate area
   - size of PAN (few cm to a few m)
   - common usage of PAN is connection between Bluetooth earpiece and a smartphone
   - wired (USB, Firewire)
   - wireless (Bluetooth, Wifi, IrDA, ZigBee)
2. LAN (Local Area Network)
   - collection of devcices connected together in one physical location such as a building, office or home
   - it can be small or large (home network vs enterpise network)
   - size/distance (several m up to 2 km)
   - LAN is used for: home networks, school networks, libraries, office, college...
3. MAN (Metropolitan Area Network)
   - larger than LAN but smaller than WAN
   - network that connects computers over a geographical distance through a shared communication path over a city, town or metropolitan area
   - it uses FDDI, CDDI and ATM as the technology with a range from 5km to 50km.
   - difficult to maintain and comes with a high cost
4. WAN (Wide Area Network)
   - large network of information that is not tied to a single location
   - WANs can facilitate communication, sharing of information between devices around the world thourgh a WAN provided
   - Internet is condisered thelargest WAN in the world
   - very difficult to maintain
5. WLANS (Wireless Local Area Network)
6. SAN (Storage Area Network)
7. VPN (Virtual Private Network)

## LAN vs WAN

for LAN

1. LAN (Local Area Network) - Typically found in homes, offices, schools, libraries or in other smaller places.
2. Designed for connecting device like computers, printeras and servers in a close proximity environtment.
3. LAN offer higher data transfer speeds and bandwith compared to WANs. This is becasue LANs are designed for local and internal use, allowing faste communication between devices
4. LANs are moe cost-effective to set-up and maintain

for WAN

1. WAN (Wide Area Network) - collection of a local-area networks (LANs) or other networks that communicate with one another. You can imagine WAN as a "network of networks"
2. Examples of WANs: Internet, global corporate network connecting offices worldwide, telecommunications network spanning a country.

## Network Devices

1. Routers
   - Router acts as the 'traffic director' of a network. They are responsible for directing data packets between different networks, such as LANs and WANs
   - Routers number one purpose: routing. Routers have routing tables to determine best path for data to travel
     -Todays router usually perform functionality of both routers and switches
   - Routers are used for network segmentation
   - Router perform NAT (Network Address Translation)
2. Switches
   - Switches use MAC address of a device to send data only to the port that the destination device is plugged into
   - Switches maintain mac address table to understand which devices are connected to which ports
3. Modems
   - Modem is a device that physically connect your network to your ISP's infrastructure. It establishes the initial internet connection by translating digital data from your network into a format that can be transmitted over the ISP's Network.

# Kind of Adresses

## MAC Address

1. MAC (Media Access Control) address is also known as a hardware/phydical address and it is a unique identifier assigned to a network interface controller (NIC) in a computer or networking device
2. MAC addresses are used at the data link layer (layer 2) of the OSI model. such as Ethernet or Wi-fi network.

Commit message:

Client-Server vs Peer-to-Peer.mp4

Networking.md, after:

# What is Networking?

networking is practice of connecting multiple devices or computers to share information and resources.
**Importance of Networkin:**

1. Global Connectivity
2. Efficiency & Productivity
3. Information Sharing
4. Economic Impact
5. Innovation

## Types of Networks

1. PAN (Personal Area Network)
   - PAN connects electronic devices within a user's immediate area
   - size of PAN (few cm to a few m)
   - common usage of PAN is connection between Bluetooth earpiece and a smartphone
   - wired (USB, Firewire)
   - wireless (Bluetooth, Wifi, IrDA, ZigBee)
2. LAN (Local Area Network)
   - collection of devcices connected together in one physical location such as a building, office or home
   - it can be small or large (home network vs enterpise network)
   - size/distance (several m up to 2 km)
   - LAN is used for: home networks, school networks, libraries, office, college...
3. MAN (Metropolitan Area Network)
   - larger than LAN but smaller than WAN
   - network that connects computers over a geographical distance through a shared communication path over a city, town or metropolitan area
   - it uses FDDI, CDDI and ATM as the technology with a range from 5km to 50km.
   - difficult to maintain and comes with a high cost
4. WAN (Wide Area Network)
   - large network of information that is not tied to a single location
   - WANs can facilitate communication, sharing of information between devices around the world thourgh a WAN provided
   - Internet is condisered thelargest WAN in the world
   - very difficult to maintain
5. WLANS (Wireless Local Area Network)
6. SAN (Storage Area Network)
7. VPN (Virtual Private Network)

## LAN vs WAN

for LAN

1. LAN (Local Area Network) - Typically found in homes, offices, schools, libraries or in other smaller places.
2. Designed for connecting device like computers, printeras and servers in a close proximity environtment.
3. LAN offer higher data transfer speeds and bandwith compared to WANs. This is becasue LANs are designed for local and internal use, allowing faste communication between devices
4. LANs are moe cost-effective to set-up and maintain

for WAN

1. WAN (Wide Area Network) - collection of a local-area networks (LANs) or other networks that communicate with one another. You can imagine WAN as a "network of networks"
2. Examples of WANs: Internet, global corporate network connecting offices worldwide, telecommunications network spanning a country.

## Network Devices

1. Routers
   - Router acts as the 'traffic director' of a network. They are responsible for directing data packets between different networks, such as LANs and WANs
   - Routers number one purpose: routing. Routers have routing tables to determine best path for data to travel
     -Todays router usually perform functionality of both routers and switches
   - Routers are used for network segmentation
   - Router perform NAT (Network Address Translation)
2. Switches
   - Switches use MAC address of a device to send data only to the port that the destination device is plugged into
   - Switches maintain mac address table to understand which devices are connected to which ports
3. Modems
   - Modem is a device that physically connect your network to your ISP's infrastructure. It establishes the initial internet connection by translating digital data from your network into a format that can be transmitted over the ISP's Network.

## Client-Server vs Peer-to-Peer

1. Client-Server

   - Client - device taht is requesting a remote service or that is using remote service from a server
   - Server - device that is hosting a service to the client
   - Conclusion Client-Server is network is organized around a central server that provides resources, services or data. Clients which can be individual computers or devices, request and use those resources. Client-Server is often considered centralized.

2. Peer-to-Peer
   - Conclusion Peer-toPeer is devices (peers) in network have equal status and can act both as clients and servers. Each device can request and provided resources to other devices in the network.

# Kind of Adresses

## MAC Address

1. MAC (Media Access Control) address is also known as a hardware/phydical address and it is a unique identifier assigned to a network interface controller (NIC) in a computer or networking device
2. MAC addresses are used at the data link layer (layer 2) of the OSI model. such as Ethernet or Wi-fi network.
